h1. SIMBENCH IDE Usage

This page gives a short overview of the main editors and views of the SIMBENCH IDE and their corresponding mouse and keyboard features. More documentation will be provided soon - especially documentation about the smd language and the various generators will be provided.

h2. General info about SIMBENCH IDE

The SIMBENCH IDE is an Eclipse-based application (Eclipse Mars with Xtext 2.9). It contains all plug-ins necessary for working with the set of domain-specific languages SimModel (smd), FeaMo (fmd) and Inject (inj). There is a SIMBENCH-perspective which defines the views and editors which should be used and their default location inside the IDE.

* The standard **Project Explorer** view of Eclipse can be used to navigate the project code.


h2.  smd Editor

The smd editor is the main tool for the modeler. It edits smd-files, i.e., the actual simulation model parts. The smd DSL will be documented separately.

Usage features of the SIMBENCH editor:

* The usual features of Eclipse editors apply, among them:
** undo/redo
** folding (light blue circles with minus or plus signs inside)
** comment/uncomment the marked code section by CTRL-7
* Use CTRL-SPACE anywhere to get SIMBENCH-specific content assist.
* Validation errors are shown if syntax on semantics issues exist. Validation errors are red circles with a white cross in it (as usual with Eclipse code editors). Validation errors must be cleaned up before code generation can be started.
* Validation warnings (yellow triangles) shouldn't be ignored either.
* Jump to definition/declaration by clicking on an item in the editor and pressing F3. This even works across languages (F3 after clicking on a feature name will jump to the corresponding fmd file).
* For some validation errors, quick fixes are available. Click in the line where the error is located, press CTRL-1. This opens the quick fix pop-up. Select the appropriate quick fix.

h2. Timeline view

**TBD**.

